So how does Rust do it?
We've seen in all these amas we've done so
far Rust has never asked us to
deallocate memory manually.
We've used vec.
We've used strings, both of those are
dynamic length, and there was no problem.
Rust just took care of that for
us somehow.
And yet,
Rust doesn't have a garbage collector.
So how does it do it,
how does it avoid this thing that we
have to do in C of manual memory.
How does Rust do automatic memory
management without a garbage collector?
Here's how we do it.
Okay, so back here we saw that vec
was causing allocation basically
rust just says you know what I'm
gonna automatically call dealloc
on orders right before
we return the function.
Because it's no longer in use,
[SOUND] the end.
It basically just inserts the same
instruction that C would have done that
you would have had to do manually in C and
it inserts it in the correct place.
That we're seeing it that way, [LAUGH].
One of the previous times
I was doing this course,
someone really said why doesn't
everyone do it that way?
It's a totally valid question, I mean it
seems like yeah, allocate it when you need
it and then, deallocate it when
you don't need it anymore, right?
Like duh, and yeah, it does raise
the question of why not do this, and,
when I put it out in
a simple example like this,
it doesn't really seem like
there are a lot of edge cases.
But it turns out there are some
important edge cases here.
And this gets into the concepts
of ownership and borrowing and
lifetimes that are sort of
unique to the rust compiler.
They're basically around
dealing with the edge cases.
Where this relatively conceptually simple
system runs into potential problems and
how it solves them.
Okay, so basically rusts kind
of baseline algorithm for
when to deallocate something is just says
when it goes out of scope, like okay.
Orders is out of scope here.
So from now on, I know that nobody could
possibly access orders because it was out
of scope and scope is how you
determine access for things.
So yeah, we created it up here and
then over here when the function
returns it's no longer in scope,
I know that nobody can access it so
it's definitely safe to deallocate it.
Now, when it does it this in this way,
rust is able to guarantee that there is
not gonna be any possibility of
a use after free because for
use after free to happen,
somebody would have to actually use it.
But once it's out of scope, there's no
possibility that anyone can use it.
And also there's a guarantee of
no double free because it only
goes out of scope once.
So there's only one place where it
says I'm gonna call the deallocation.
Great, also, of course,
there's a guarantee
of no garbage collection pause because
there just is no garbage collector.
Okay, so, we saw that this is like sort of
when it chose to free the memory, but it's
worth noting that Rust could have safely
chosen an earlier time to free the memory.
Like it could have freed it
before final orders right?
After this loop had run this is
the last place that actually gets us.
So yeah, it could have just very
easily done the deallocate up here.
But again, Rust has this pretty simple
heuristic of free it when it goes out of
scope so this is not where
it would choose to do that.
Now, is that gonna matter probably not in
practice, but let's say that it does for
some reason, let's say that you really
want to have that memory reclaimed and
marked as free before you
call this finish function.
Because finish is really memory hungry or
something like that needs
absolutely every resource.
Well, if you wanna do that, you can
just rewrite your function like this.
So here we have exactly
the same business logic.
We start with total orders, zero, we
define orders as the same vec, we iterate
over the same way, we add up total orders,
then we returned finish of total orders.
The only difference is I added these
sort of standalone curly braces.
So this is something you can do in Rust,
you can just sort of define
an anonymous scope like this.
And this is kind of what it's used for
is basically as a way to give Rust a hint
about how you want to manage the memory.
So now because orders is going out of
scope here before the end of the function
that's going to result in rust choosing
to deallocate it a little bit sooner.
So the only difference
between this version and
the previous one is when Rust is going to
choose to automatically deallocate orders.
In practice, this is something that you
don't tend to do very often or it doesn't
tend to be important very often, but it's
worth noting that you can use this to get
sort of a similar level of control as what
you would get in something like C or C++.
Obviously not the same level of control
because you're not actually doing manual
memory management.
But it's a way that you can do it, while
still maintaining these really strong
guarantees of like, yeah,
no chance of a use after free,
no chance of a double free and
still no need for garbage collector.